Carder Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Heather Brown.
Location Swicker Office.
Today's date the 29th of September 2015.
Heather, would you be kited up for the record to spell your name in full?
Yes, it's Heather.
H-E-A-T-H-E-R Brown.
B-R-O-W-N.
Thank you very much indeed.
Carder Carnival obviously dates back to 1990.
Can you remember when you first got involved and in what capacity?
Well, I recall first seeing the carnival around about 1994, 95,
when I watched various parades.
But I got involved, I think, in 1997
when I started working for Cardiff Council, initially as a production assistant
and then in later years as the development manager,
where I kind of worked more closely with Steve in terms of developing routes
and looking at venues and trying to decide where to go next
and trying to help with places for the camp, etc.
So at various different levels I've worked with the carnival
for, well, it's nearly 20 years.
And you have the emotional scars to prove it.
I have, yes.
Absolutely.
Now, one thing I've always enjoyed about working with Heather,
who is better known as Hetty, is your unflappability.
Carnival is a riot of colour.
It's certainly not a riot in a political sense,
but there's an energy and enthusiasm and a libertarian outlook
which can be daunting to some.
But I think it's true to say in all the time we've worked together,
have you ever come close to losing your carnival cool?
I don't think I have.
I mean, I enjoy the chaos.
I think that's the truth of it.
There is an element of not knowing what's going to happen.
There is an element of just kind of starting off and seeing where it goes.
But most of the time I can honestly say I've really enjoyed it.
I mean, we have had some really insane moments.
And I think the half naked blue ladies of whichever carnival that was
spring to mind in terms of not knowing what the reaction to that was going to be like.
We've had some crazy people join us on the parade.
That's always one that is kind of hard to predict.
You know, the participants usually know what's expected of them and where they're going.
But, you know, so many times people have just stepped in.
And again, you know, have been either encouraged or discouraged,
depending on their general behaviour.
Yeah.
But no, you know, I think, you know, weather as well.
I mean, we've had some ferocious weather to contend with sometimes.
And again, I think the fact that there's a deluge years as is known in the company.
2005, six and seven, three in a row, five, six and seven.
And we're talking not rain, not precipitation.
We're talking complete whiter.
And we're talking all day.
So that's during the setup, during the parade.
So our audience is affected and those who appear
turn up in like full body sou'esters, which is they've just come off a trawler ship or something.
And I think, again, the thing that I've always admired about the participants
is they're just up for it regardless.
It's weatherproof in that sense.
They've worked so hard.
They've put everything into the sort of the two weeks or the two months
or however long they've been working and preparing and what they're doing.
And they just they want to do it regardless.
And I think only once have we postponed it for a day.
Was there one year where we didn't do it on the Saturday, but we did it on the Sunday?
I don't think there was in all honesty.
You think we've always put it on the act of it?
The only parade we've ever postponed, and it was postponed, it was cancelled, was actually
not the Cardiff Carnival itself, but the first ever time we attempted to remount it
for Cardiff Bay Development Corporation.
And it was the day on which the evening before Lady Diana had died in a car crash in Paris.
And then the morning came and then gradually it became apparent as football matches were being cancelled.
That was the Rainbow Festival.
Yeah, there we are.
It was going to be the Rainbow Festival.
Yes.
And the news came through when we were building the site really early in the morning, sort of like 6 o'clock, I think.
Yeah, all over the UK, everything was being cancelled.
And so that's the only one that, yes, I think I would remember if it had been postponed its entirety.
I mean, the other thing that I have to say to the credit as myself, as one of the organisers, is
the carnival has never not started exactly on time.
And if you've ever tried to organise hundreds of excited people and to get them in the right line up,
all things to actually be able to do what it says on the tin as advertised, it will start at this time.
You know, in 26 years, you know, I've never looked at you or Yanis, your colleague and said we're not ready.
No, that's absolutely true.
And anyone who's ever seen that kind of time before it sort of steps off where, you know, everybody's getting ready,
be it in the car park of the atrium or, you know, at Buton Community Centre or wherever it was,
you know, there's just this gradual build up and build up of excitement and kind of buzz.
And it's almost like, you know, you're not going to contain it any longer.
You know, if it's going to go, it's going to go.
And if it's going at two, it goes at two because everybody's ready.
And, you know, that's really impressive to see and very exciting, I think, to watch the start of the parade
because, you know, everybody can't wait.
It's kind of, you know, what they've been working towards.
So that's always been a fantastic place to be.
I've enjoyed being at the start of the parade and sort of seeing all that.
And also, I think, just, yeah, some of the amazing costumes and creations down the years.
And we've kind of gone through various phases of trying different things,
of kind of trying to bring in Simon Systems, going back to being everything on foot,
trying to build different sculptures, working with lots of different artists and all of those things.
Kind of each building on the other to get you back to where you end up.
And I'm sure if anybody looked at the very first carnival and the one that we just had this summer,
you know, the kind of journey of all of the people who've been involved from the beginning to the end in terms of their
their creativity and their skills and, you know, their abilities is just huge.
No, absolutely. And of course, as you mentioned, we've taken different routes, different,
we've started at different places, we've had the carnival camps at different places
and we've had the outcomes in different places.
And one of my faves, I have to say, has to be the steps of the National Museum of Wales,
which is an unlikely place for a stage.
And yet, before they, you know, in order to make them accessible to everybody,
they placed those lovely brass railings through them.
I mean, it was it was like a layer cake that we could end up on with different platforms,
everyone doing different dances or performances and then having something to say at the end.
But I know that you were very much you very much helped us come down in less or see at times to to the bay
where we'd benefit from what can only describe as a rather wonderful roll off,
a roll on, you know, a full on rock festival stage.
And and even I recall a soaker version of the National Anthem of Wales with red, green and gold,
Caribbean colours, pyrotechnics.
In terms of the outcomes, did you have a favourite or one that sort of comes to mind as work particularly well?
I mean, like we've staged it in all sorts of different ways.
And although the full on stage was great,
I liked the sort of the catwalk bit that we added in.
So at one point when we had the parade coming down the middle of the oval basin,
we built like a ramp that it could go up and over so that everyone could see it.
And I that to me kind of worked best because it was seeing the parade as it was meant to be seen as a parade
rather than as a sort of stage performance when everybody.
Yeah, you know, they're at the end of the line and they're kind of, you know, letting off steam and celebrating.
But the costumes are almost like meant to be seen.
Yes, that's commented on decoded for the public.
And I always felt that that was a really big step forward for us in terms of being able to present it to a big audience.
I mean, we were, as you say, very lucky that we kind of were able to sort of work through those years
when the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation and subsequently Harbour Authority had funds to just to develop the area really.
And the mass carnival, I think, was a very big part in sort of developing audiences down there
and, you know, getting people coming back to events and to see things in that part of town.
Yeah, yeah. The support role of the council and I have to say the events team has been invaluable over time.
So when I come late this interview now by declaring that Hetty, you are a carnival hero.
Will you also take that message back to all your colleagues?
I mean, all the stewards, all the traffic management people, everybody who basically enabled it to happen.
I mean, carnival is a huge bubble of excitement and goes across many grains of society.
So to be able to be given that opportunity, you know, it really has been people open minded, fair, celebratory people like yourself
giving large scale celebration of crack of the whip.
In fact, we did have whip crackers one year as I recall. Risk assessed that.
So it's a personal and a collective. I hereby declare you a carnival hero.
Thank you very much indeed. Thank you.